RFC018: Issuing credentials using OIDC4VCI (#257)
nuts-foundation/nuts-specification: rfc/rfc018-openid-credential-issuance.md

to resolvable DIDs in server-to-server flows, without user (human) interaction from the holder.

## 2. Terminology

This specification uses the terms "DID", "DID document" and "Service" as defined by the [DID Core Data Model](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/),
"Verifiable Credential", "Credential Subject", "Holder" and "Issuer" as defined by the [Verifiable Credential Data Model](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/), and
"Wallet", "Client Metadata" and "Credential Offer" as defined by [OpenID 4 Verifiable Credential Issuance](https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html).

## 3. Overview

While OpenID4VCI mainly describes issuing credentials through a browser or to a mobile wallet app,
this specification describes how to use OpenID4VCI to issue credentials server-to-server, without user interaction from the holder.

Nodes MUST support both processes of issuing and receiving credentials over OpenID4VCI.

## 3.1 Supported Flows and Features

Conforming implementations MUST support the following features:

- Pre-authorized code flow
- Credential offer:

>   - with `credential_offer` parameter

Reviewer: we use `credential_offer_uri`, while our OAPI specs describe the `credential_offer` scheme

Author: We use the credential_offer parameter, which in encoded in the credential offer request (issuer->wallet). Using URI would mean the issuer provides a URI at which the wallet can retrieve the credential.

Reviewer: don't know what I was thinking here

>   - with `string` values, referring to a credential's `id` in `credentials_supported`

Reviewer: We currently do not support this since our credential definitions do not contain an `id`? @woutslakhorst

Reviewer: For the `credentials` array I think we only support the `JSON object` containing the `ldp_vc` format specific `credential_definition` as defined for in https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/editors-draft/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html#name-vc-secured-using-data-integ

Reviewer: Recent versions of the spec seem to have replaced `id` by `scope`. The `scope` field is also not present in our definitions. Not sure if the node or this RFC should be changed?

> - Credentials in JSON-LD format

Reviewer: == `ldp_vc` format type

- Issuer- and wallet metadata

## 3.2 Credential Offer Response

The OpenID4VCI specification does not specify responses for the credential offer.
But since this specification describes server-to-server interaction
a response is useful for the issuer to know whether the credential offer was accepted.

### 3.2.1 Credential Offer Success Response

> In case the wallet considers the offer valid, it MUST respond with HTTP status `200 OK`.

Reviewer: Just to check, we still need to implement this right?

Reviewer: This conflicts with the synchronous flow. An invalid credential in the synchronous flow for a valid offer would result in a 400 while this line says that it MUST be a 200. A better separation between sync/async flow should fix this

Author: It says when it is considered valid? So if valid, 200, if not 400.

The sync part will probably change when we support retying.

Reviewer: I guess it depends on what you consider to be "the offer". My interpretation was that this is just the `credential_offer` message, but seems that you refer to the entire flow which includes retrieval of the credential for the sync flow.

> This is regardless of whether the wallet will actually revrieve the wallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is regardless of whether the wallet will actually retrieve the credential.
```

> If the wallet decides to retrieve the credential synchronously, it SHOULD respond with `status` set to `credential_received`.

Reviewer: OpenID4VCI spec has renamed the **credential request** `synchronous` flow to `immediate issuance` flow. We probably want to use the same terminology? But I do not know how/if this applies to the offer...

Author: It's a slightly different thing here, from the wallet's perspective. This is not spec'd. But I renamed it to be more like the spec.

Below is a non-normative example of such a response:

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "credential_received"
}
```

### 3.2.2 Credential Offer Error Response

This specification extends the specification with the following error responses a wallet MUST support when receiving a credential offer:

- `invalid_request`: the offer is missing or invalid.
- `invalid_grant`: the offer does not contain a grant the wallet could use to retrieve the credential.

It MUST respond with HTTP status `400 Bad Request` and a response body containing the error code.

Below is a non-normative example of such a response:

```http
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "error": "invalid_grant"
}
```

## 4. Client Metadata Discovery using DID documents

To offer a credential the issuer needs to discover the wallet's credential offer endpoint, which is registered in the client metadata.

To allow a (Nuts) wallet to be discovered, the wallet MUST be represented by a resolvable DID.

> The DID document MUST contain a `node-http-services-baseurl` service, which contains the base URL for node-to-node HTTP services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DID document MUST contain a `node-http-services-baseurl` service type, which contains the base URL for node-to-node HTTP services.
```

Author: the DID document contains a service with that type, not the service type

The issuer appends the following path to it to resolve the client metadata: `/n2n/identity/<did>/.well-known/openid-credential-wallet`,
replacing `<did>` with the DID of the wallet holder.

## 5. Security

### 5.1 Credential Issuer Trust

In server-to-server issuance of credentials, there's no user approving the credential offer before requesting it and loading it into the holder's wallet.
Therefore, the holder must make a decision whether to trust the credential issuer.
Trust SHOULD be derived from the TLS trust anchors referred to by section 5.2 (Transport Security).

### 5.2 Transport Security

> To prevent against eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks, all exchanges MUST be done over HTTPS.

Reviewer: This is already a hard requirement derived from the OAuth/OpenID specs that the OpenID4VCI spec builds on. Maybe we should mention this since this spec only defines what we added?

Clients should refuse to connect to plain HTTP endpoints.
Refer to [RFC008 Certificate Structure](rfc008-certificate-structure.md) for requirements regarding these certificates and which Certificate Authorities should be accepted.

## Appendix A: Design decisions

### A.1 No PIN requirement

OpenID4VCI specifies a PIN to mitigate credential stealing,
e.g. someone looking over the shoulder of the intended holder standing at a terminal,
quickly scanning the QR code and stealing the resulting credential.
Since this specification describes server-to-server flows, there is no user involved from who the QR code can be stolen
or coerced into giving the QR code.
To prevent eavesdropping, HTTPS MUST be used to protect communication (see Appendix B.1).

### A.2 Trust issuer based on TLS certificates

Since the TLS trust anchors are curated, trusting credential issuers can be derived from trust TLS server certificates:
Credential issuer identifiers are URLs and thus link to a trusted TLS certificate.

Future, more involved trust models could involve the issuer presenting a credential from which trust is derived.

> For instance, proving that the issuer is a registered legal entity, which can be held accountable.

Reviewer: none of us are lawyers, so I would refrain from statements like this

to resolvable DIDs in server-to-server flows, without user (human) interaction from the holder.

## 2. Terminology

This specification uses the terms "DID", "DID document" and "Service" as defined by the [DID Core Data Model](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/),
"Verifiable Credential", "Credential Subject", "Holder" and "Issuer" as defined by the [Verifiable Credential Data Model](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/), and
"Wallet", "Client Metadata" and "Credential Offer" as defined by [OpenID 4 Verifiable Credential Issuance](https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html).

## 3. Overview

While OpenID4VCI mainly describes issuing credentials through a browser or to a mobile wallet app,
this specification describes how to use OpenID4VCI to issue credentials server-to-server, without user interaction from the holder.

Nodes MUST support both processes of issuing and receiving credentials over OpenID4VCI.

## 3.1 Supported Flows

Issuers MUST support the pre-authorized code flow to issue credentials.
While OpenID4VCI specifies a PIN to mitigate credential stealing,
implementations MUST NOT require a PIN in server-to-server flows (see Appendix A.1).

> The following from the OpenID4VCI specification does not need to be supported:

Reviewer 2: "does not need" might be too vague.
Are all the items in the list restricted by what's advertised in the (wallet/issue) metadata? If not then the does not becomes a must not?

Author: Then you can't have a generic OpenID4VCI wallet that also support Nuts, since a compelte implementation vs this RFC are mutually exclusive.

Maybe we should inverse it, specifying what MUST be supported? Although I wrote it up this way since that sounded easier.

Reviewer 2: Usually I scan to see what I MUST do and skip everything else ;)

- Authorization code flow
- Credential offers:
  - with `string` values, referring to a credential's `id` in `credentials_supported`
  - specified as `credential_offer_uri` parameter
- Batching
- Deferred credential requests
- Credential types other than JSON-LD
- Requesting an updated credential

## 3.2 Credential Offer Response

The OpenID4VCI specification does not specify responses for the credential offer.
But since this specification describes server-to-server interaction
a response is useful for the issuer to know whether the credential offer was accepted.

### 3.2.1 Credential Offer Success Response

> In case the wallet accepted the offer and will try to retrieve the credential, it MUST respond with HTTP status `200 OK`.

Reviewer 2: You mean retrieve within the context of the offer call? Not async

Author: No, just whether the wallet accepted the credential offer. I'll clarify the sentence.

Therefore, the holder must make a decision whether to trust the credential issuer.
Trust SHOULD be derived from the TLS trust anchors referred to by section 5.2 (Transport Security).

### 5.2 Transport Security

To prevent against eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks, all exchanges MUST be done over HTTPS.
Clients should refuse to connect to plain HTTP endpoints.
Refer to [RFC008 Certificate Structure](rfc008-certificate-structure.md) for requirements regarding these certificates and which Certificate Authorities should be accepted.

## Appendix A: Design decisions

### A.1 No PIN requirement

OpenID4VCI specifies a PIN to mitigate credential stealing,
e.g. someone looking over the shoulder of the intended holder standing at a terminal,
quickly scanning the QR code and stealing the resulting credential.
Since this specification describes server-to-server flows, there is no user involved from who the QR code can be stolen
or coerced into giving the QR code.
To prevent eavesdropping, HTTPS MUST be used to protect communication (see Appendix B.1).

> ### A.2 Trust issuer based on TLS certificates

Reviewer 2: Do we do this currently?

Author: I think I tried to convey that we only trust issuers from trusted certificates, which is defined by the truststore. And since identifier URLs are HTTPS URLs, they're trusted if the connection can be made.
